# Processes

- A program is passive code stored on disk.
- A process is a running instance of a program with its own memory, stack, heap, resources, threads and execution environment.


## Why use another process

- Every process has it's own resources. So, bug in one process cannot affect the other.
- Similarly, a crash in one process will kill that process but the other one will be running unaffected.
- If we want to execute commands or scripts that we usually run on terminal from within GO program.


Because sometimes you want:

- Isolation
- Safety
- Independent resources

## Goroutines

- When we run our program, a process is created and within that single process we create multiple goroutines(workers) that are working concurrently.
- All goroutines share the same memory and CPU resources. So, one gooroutine's bug can affect others. A crash in one of them can crash the whole process.


## Spawning a process

- Ask the OS to run another independent program.
- This is done using the os/exec package.

```go
func main() {
	cmd := exec.Command("echo", "Hello World!")
	output, err := cmd.Output()

	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal(err)
	}
	fmt.Println(string(output))
}
```

```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"os/exec"
)

func main() {
	cmd := exec.Command("grep", "ERROR", "logs.txt")

	output, err := cmd.Output()

	if err != nil {
		fmt.Println("Error:", err)
		return
	}

	fmt.Println(string(output))
}
```

```go
func main() {
	cmd := exec.Command("printenv", "SHELL")
	result, err := cmd.Output()

	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal(err)
	}
	fmt.Println(string(result))
}
```

## Output vs Start

- Output says start a new process and wait until the process finished and bring me back the results.
- Go program pauses until the process finishes.
- Start says start the process and we both will run concurrently. I will not wait for you to finish.

## Wait

- Some commands are time consuming and can take a while before they return us some results.
- But if we do not wait for them, our main function can terminate and the execution will be over.
- So, we need to tell Go, to wait for the result. It will block the execution.

```go
func main() {
	cmd := exec.Command("sleep", "5")

	err := cmd.Start()

	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal(err)
	}
	cmd.Wait()
	fmt.Println("hello, terminating now")
}
```

## Kill a process

- Terminate a process while it is still in progress.

```go
cmd.Process.Kill()
```

