# How Go works

```go
package main

import "fmt"

func main() { fmt.Println("Hello World") }

```
- Let’s understand how this Go program actually runs, step by step

## 1️⃣ Compilation (go build or go run)

Program is an instruction to a computer. But computers only understand machine code not our Go source code. So, we need to convert our source code to machine code so that machines can execute it.


- Parses the code → checks syntax.
- Type checks → ensures types are correct.
- Go compiles directly to native machine code. No interpreter, no VM (unlike Java). Os can run this executable on it's own.
- Produces a single executable binary.


## 2️⃣ Program Execution

When you execute the binary:

- The OS loads the binary into memory.
- Go’s runtime starts preparing for code execution. Initialization and startup.
- It calls the `main` method present in `main` package.

```go
[ Your Code ] + [ Go Runtime ]
```

## 3️⃣ Program Exit

- After main() finishes,
- Runtime performs cleanup,
- Process exits,
- OS reclaims memory.



## Go Runtime

The Go runtime is a small system embedded inside the final binary that provides some features like:

- **Automatic memory management and Garbage collection.** In languages like C, we manually have to allocalte and free memory. Go runtime handles that for us.
- Goroutine Scheduler and concurrency management. The OS does not know what a goroutine is.
- Panic & Recover
- **Initialization and startup.** Before `main.main()` runs: Runtime sets up memory, Initializes scheduler and Prepares GC.





















