# Compilation and Execution

## Compilation

- A program is just a set of instructions to a machine.
- We write source code in high level programming language like Go but computers do not understand them. Computers only understand machine language.
- So, we need to convert our source code into machine readable code.
- Go compiler does that. It takes Go source code and produces a binary executable which machines can understand and execute.

## Go Runtime

- Compilation produces machine readable code then why do we need runtime? In languages like C or C++, machines are able to execute this compiled code.
- Go runtime does a lot of things for us which otherwise we would have to do manually which improves developer experience and efficiency also minimising bugs.
- We need runtime to manage certain aspects of program execution like Memory management, Garbage collection, concurrency, provide runtime libraries and ensuring cross platform compatibility.
- The binary executable has the compiled code as well as runtime.

## Go Build

- Compiler compiles GO source code and generates a binary executable file that is stored in our disk.
- This executable then needs to be run manually.
- Useful when we are done with local development and want to deploy our binary executable to staging or production.

## Go Run

- Single step to compile the source code and execute the binary executable.
- First, the complier will compile the source code into binary executable but that executable is not explicitly stored in our disk. The executable gets stored in RAM.
- After compilation is successful, it executes the binary.
- Once execution finsishes, the file is deleted from RAM.
- Useful while local development.
