
# How computers store characters

- Machines only understand bits and bytes. So, how are characters stored?
- Every character in this world(in any language or emojis) has a unicode number.
- UTF-8 encoding is a mechanism which takes a character and computes it's binary representation.
- Different characters can take different bytes in memory. English alphabets takes 1 byte. Emojis can take 4 bytes.
- In short, every character is stored as binary and different characters take different bytes.

## Strings

- String is a sequence of characters. Since, each character has binary reprsentation in memory, we can say string is a sequence of bytes.
- Strings are immutable. Once created they cannot be modified. We have to create a new string if we need to modify a string.
- `a` has ASCII value of 97 and `A` 65.

``` go
s := "hello"

h  e  l  l  o
68 65 6c 6c 6f   â† bytes

```

## len function

- It counts number of bytes not number of characters.
- Generally english alphabets take up 1 byte so it gives accurate results.

```go
func main() {
	var r string = "à¤¹ðŸ™‚"
	fmt.Println(len(r)) // 7
}
```

## Runes

- A rune is one character (Unicode character).
- They are declared with single quotes.
- Rune is a sperate type but is `int32` behind the scenes.

## utf8.RuneCountInString

- Counts number of unicode characters in a string.

```go
utf8.RuneCountInString("ðŸ™‚") // 1
```

## Double quotes vs Raw string literal (Backticks)

- Strings can be created using double quotes and back ticks. Single quotes does not work.
- Backtick or raw string literal does not respect escape sequences.

## Escape sequences

### `\n` New line. It starts a new line.

```go
func main() {
	name := "John \n Doe"
	name2 := `John \n Doe`

	fmt.Println(name)
	fmt.Println(name2)

	/*
		  John
		  Doe
	    John \n Doe
	*/

}
```

### `\t` It adds a tab space

```go
func main() {
	name := "John \t Doe"
	name2 := `John \t Doe`

	fmt.Println(name)
	fmt.Println(name2)

	/*
		John     Doe
	  John \t Doe	*/

}

```

### Carriage return `\r`. It takes the cursor to the begining of line and starts replacing characters

```go
func main() {
	name := "John\rDoe"
	name2 := `John \r Doe`

	fmt.Println(name)
	fmt.Println(name2)

	/*
	Doen
	John \r Doe
	*/

}
```

### With raw string literal, escape sequence is treated as seperate characters. So, the len function will return different results.


```go
func main() {
	var name = "Hello\nWorld"
	var name2 = `Hello\nWorld`

	fmt.Println(len(name), len(name2))                                       // 11 12
	fmt.Println(utf8.RuneCountInString(name), utf8.RuneCountInString(name2)) // 11 12

}
```



## Concat strings

- `+` operator is used to cancat two strings.

## Comparing strings

- Strings are compared via ASCII values.
- If we have same prefix but different length shorter is smaller based on lexicographic ordering.

```go
func main() {
	fmt.Println("Apple" > "apple")
	fmt.Println("apple" > "app")
	/*
			false
	    true
	*/
}
```


## Iterating over strings

- We can use traditional for loop as well as range function.

```go
func main() {
	name := "Hello world"

	for i, char := range name {
		fmt.Printf("INDEX: %d VALUE: %c \n", i, char)
	}

	/*
		INDEX: 0 VALUE: H
		INDEX: 1 VALUE: e
		INDEX: 2 VALUE: l
		INDEX: 3 VALUE: l
		INDEX: 4 VALUE: o
		INDEX: 5 VALUE:
		INDEX: 6 VALUE: w
		INDEX: 7 VALUE: o
		INDEX: 8 VALUE: r
		INDEX: 9 VALUE: l
		INDEX: 10 VALUE: d
	*/
}
```
