# Fmt package

- **Printing** → Display some output to terminal or console. Output can be simple hardcoded text or a dynamic text with variables injected using foirmatted verbs.
- **Scanning** → read input from console where user is typing.
- **Creating Formatted Strings** → Nothing is printed. Instead, the formatted result is stored in msg.
- **Formatted error** → build error with variables



## Printing functions

## Print

- No spaces added if we print multiple values.
- No newline at the end. Cursor stays at same line.
- Concatenates values.

```go
func main() {
	fmt.Print("hello", "world", 5) // helloworld5 10%        
}
```

## Println

- Adds spaces between them for better readability.
- After printing, Takes the cursor to new line.

```go
func main() {
	fmt.Println("hello", "world", 5) // hello world 5
}
```


## Printf

- Create a string with placeholders and replace those placeholders with  variable values.
- Does NOT add newline automatically.

```go
name := "Saksham"
age := 28
fmt.Printf("Name: %s, Age: %d\n", name, age)

```


## Formatting functions

- Printing functions logs something to the console.
- Formatting functions do not log anything but return a formatted string instead.
- They can be used for string concatenation purpose as well.
- They work the same way as printing functions but instead of logging values to console , returns a string.
- Sprint
- Sprintf
- Sprintln


## Scanning functions

- Take input from the user through console and store in variables.
- Whenever scan function is encountered, the program waits till it receives the inputs.
- We must pass pointers (&var) so they can modify the variables as everything in Go is passed by value by default.

## Scan

- Scan function takes addresses of variables. It can take 0 to n parameters.
- When entering values from console, values should be seperated by a `space` or a `enter`.
- The input values are validated against their types and throws an error if value of wrong type is provided.

```go
func main() {
	var name string
	var age int8

	fmt.Println("Enter name and age")

	fmt.Scan(&name, &age)

	fmt.Println(name, age)
}
```

## Scanln

- Stops reading input from the console when a newline is encountered.

## Scanf

- Expects the input in the exact same format as we declare in the bouble quotes.

```go
	fmt.Scanf("%s %d", &name, &age)
```

## Errorf

- Can use formatting verbs.
- Parses the input and returns the value.


```go
func main() {
	log := fmt.Errorf("%s %d", "John", 33)
}

```
