# Bufio Package

## I/O Operations

- A program needs to communicate with external systems (like files, keyboard input, network requests, databases).
- Input is how data flows from external system to program like reading a file, reading keyboard input, reading data from a database.
- Output means data flow from program to external system like outputting something to console, writing to a file.
- I/O operations are slow. `bufio` package exists to make input/output (I/O) operations faster, more efficient, and more convenient.


## Buffering

- When you read or write data using: `os.File`,  `net.Conn`, `os.Stdin`, `os.Stdout`, Each read/write may result in a system call.
- System calls are very expensive and slow. System calls are thousands of times slower than memory operations.
- Buffering collects data in memory first and then:
- Writes it in one big chunk
- Or reads a large chunk once and serves small reads from memory
- So instead of 5 system calls:You get 1 system call.

## What is a Buffer?

- A buffer is a temporary area in memory (RAM) that stores data temporarily while it is being transferred between two places. Usually between:
Application ↔ Buffer ↔ OS ↔ Disk/Network to reduce interactions with expensive systems.

```go
Application ↔ Buffer ↔ OS ↔ Disk/Network
```
- Write Buffer (Accumulating Before Writing). Program writes data, Data goes to buffer in memory, When buffer is full OR Flush() is called, Data is written to disk in one big operation.
- Read Buffer (Reading Large Chunk Once) Buffer reads large chunk from disk, Program reads small pieces from memory


## How bufio.Writer Works

- We can write to any external system like `stdout`, `file` etc

### Example: Writing to stdout

```go
func main() {
	writer := bufio.NewWriter(os.Stdout)

	writer.WriteString("Hello World, ")
	writer.WriteString("How are you doing today?")

	writer.Flush()

}
```

### Example: Writing to file

```go
func main() {
	file, error := os.Create("test.txt")

	if error != nil {
		log.Fatal("Unable to create the file")
	}

	defer file.Close()

	writer := bufio.NewWriter(file)

	writer.WriteString("Hello World, ")
	writer.WriteString("How are you doing today?")

	writer.Flush()

}
```

## How bufio.Reader Works

- A large chunk is read once and Small reads are served from memory.

```go
func main() {
	file, error := os.Open("logs.txt")

	if error != nil {
		log.Fatal("Unable to open the file")
	}

	defer file.Close()

	reader := bufio.NewReader(file)

	data, err := reader.ReadString('\n')

	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal("Unable to read the file")
	}

	fmt.Println(data)
}
```
