# Rate limiting

- Technique used to control the amount of incoming traffic to our systems. Ensures resources are not overwhelmed with too many requests.
- Otherwise it can lead to high CPU spikes, memory and DB gets overwhelmed as it has only limited connections. This can make the entire system slow.


## Fixed window 

- Allow only N requests in a fixed time block, then reset.
- Like only 5 requests per minute.


### Boundary burst problem

- Lets say we limit our requests to 5 per minute.
- But at 59th second we got 5 requests which will be handled. Now the counter resets. At 1st second I got another 5 requests. So in less than 3 secs, I handled 10 requests. 

## Token bucket algorithm

- You have a bucket. Bucket has a max capacity. Tokens are refilled at a fixed rate. Every request needs one token. If token is available, allow otherwise reject.
- Max capacity tells how many instant requests can my system handle if there is burst in traffic.
- Refill rate tells us the number of requests that will be handled on an average.
- It allows sudden bursts  + controlled average rate.

## Simple Example

Let’s say:

- Bucket size = 5 tokens
- Refill rate = 1 token per second
- Initially, the bucket is full with 5 tokens.

```go
[● ● ● ● ●]  (5 tokens)
```

🚀 Burst happens

5 requests come instantly:

```go
Request 1 → ✅ (4 left)
Request 2 → ✅ (3 left)
Request 3 → ✅ (2 left)
Request 4 → ✅ (1 left)
Request 5 → ✅ (0 left)
Request 6 → ❌ (no tokens)
```

⏳ After that

Tokens refill slowly:

- After 1 sec → +1 token
- After 2 sec → +2 tokens

📊 Meaning

👉 You can:

- Send 5 requests instantly (burst)
- Then only 1 request per second

