# Processes

- A program is passive code stored on disk.
- A process is a running instance of a program with its own memory, stack, heap, resources, threads and execution environment.


## Why use another process

- Every process has it's own resources. So, bug in one process cannot affect the other.
- Similarly, a crash in one process will kill that process but the another one will be running unaffected.


Because sometimes you want:

- Isolation
- Safety
- Independent resources

## Goroutines

- When we run our program, a process is created and within that single process we create multiple goroutines(workers) that are working concurrently.
- All goroutines share the same memory and CPU resources. So, one gooroutine's bug can affect others. A crash in one of them can crash the whole process.


## Spawning a process

- Ask the OS to run another independent program. One process is created when we run our GO program and anothe rone will be created when we ask our OS to run another program form our GO code.
- This is done using the os/exec package.

```go
func main() {
	cmd := exec.Command("echo", "Hello World!")
	output, err := cmd.Output()

	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal(err)
	}
	fmt.Println(string(output))
}
```

```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"os/exec"
)

func main() {
	cmd := exec.Command("grep", "ERROR", "logs.txt")

	output, err := cmd.Output()

	if err != nil {
		fmt.Println("Error:", err)
		return
	}

	fmt.Println(string(output))
}
```

```go
func main() {
	cmd := exec.Command("printenv", "SHELL")
	result, err := cmd.Output()

	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal(err)
	}
	fmt.Println(string(result))
}
```

- Please create another process than runs this command echo.

## Output vs Start

- Output says start a new process and wait untill teh process finished and bring me back the results
- Go program pauses until the process finsishes.
- Start says start the process and we both will run concurrently. I will not wait for you to finish.

## Wait

- Some commands are time consuming and can take a while before they return us some results.
- But if we do not wait for them, our main function can terminate and the execution will be over.
- So, we need to tell Go, to wait for the result. It will block the execution.

```go
func main() {
	cmd := exec.Command("sleep", "5")

	err := cmd.Start()

	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal(err)
	}
	cmd.Wait()
	fmt.Println("hello, terminating now")
}
```

## Concurrency

- Multiple processes run concurrently under the OS scheduler.
- But unlike goroutines, they do not share the memory.
- Two porcesses communicate via files, sockets, pipes, stdin/stdout

## Kill a process

- Terminate a process while it is still in progress.

```go
cmd.Process.Kill()
```

## Communication between processes

- We can use a bidirectional pipe from io package.
- Pipe creates an in memory connection between a writer and a reader.
- Useful to stream data between goroutines and real time communication without storing data in memory first.
- ReadAll keeps reading untill all messages are received.

```go
func main() {
	pr, pw := io.Pipe()

	go func() {
		messages := []string{
			"Hello\n",
			"How are you?\n",
			"Bye\n",
		}
		for _, message := range messages {
			pw.Write([]byte(message))
			time.Sleep(time.Second * 1)
		}
		pw.Close()
	}()

	data, _ := io.ReadAll(pr)
	fmt.Println(string(data))
}
```
