# RWMutex


## Problem with sync.Mutex

- Only one goroutine can access critical section at a time. One goroutine will lock the mutex and others cannot lock it unless the first goroutine releases that lock.
- If we have 100 goroutines that only wants to read data, while nobody is modifying it, it still needs to do it one by one.
- It wastes concurrency.

## RWMutex solves this

- If no goroutine is modifying data, multiple goroutines can concurrently read data.
- This is possible because a RWMutex has two types of locks read and write. Multiple goroutines can acquire read lock.
- If a goroutine is modifying data, all the readers and writers are blocked and will wait for the lock to be released.
- Only one goroutine can acquire the write lock while multiple goroutines can acquire the read lock.

## Simple example

```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"sync"
	"time"
)

var (
	counter = 0
	rw      sync.RWMutex
)

func reader(id int) {
	rw.RLock() // read lock

	fmt.Printf("Reader %d reads: %d\n", id, counter)

	time.Sleep(time.Second)

	rw.RUnlock() // release read lock
}

func writer() {
	rw.Lock() // write lock

	counter++
	fmt.Println("Writer updated counter")

	time.Sleep(2 * time.Second)

	rw.Unlock() // release write lock
}

func main() {
	go reader(1)
	go reader(2)

	time.Sleep(100 * time.Millisecond)

	go writer()

	time.Sleep(5 * time.Second)
}
```

- Reader1 acquires a read lock and sleeps for 1 second.
- Menawhile Reader2 also acquires the lock as multiple readers can read concurrrently.
- Writer tries to acquire write lock but it needs to wait for active readers to release their locks. Writer is blocked.
- Writer acquires write lock. Now all other readers and writers are blocked.


## When should you use RWMutex?

- Read heavy system. Frequent reads and rare writes.
- Like cache

## Real-world Analogy

Imagine a whiteboard in office:

- Many employees can read it together
- But while someone is writing on it: nobody should read, nobody else should write
