# HTTP

- Consider a client server architecture. Client requests for a service, server processes that request and sends back the response to the client. HTTP is the language client and server use to communicate.
- Imagine you want to send a letter. You need a language to write the letter in and a postal service to physically deliver it. HTTP is the language. TCP is the delivery service.
- First, a TCP connection is established between the client and server using the TCP three-way handshake.
- Once the TCP connection is established, data can be exchanged over that connection.
- To structure this data exchange, the client and server use the HTTP protocol, which defines the rules for how requests and responses should be formatted and interpreted.
- The HTTP request travels through the TCP connection, and the server sends an HTTP response back through the same connection.


## HTTP/1.0

- Client wants to send multiple requests to a server.
- Okay, for every request create a new TCP connection with the server and then make the HTTP request over that connection.

```go
Open connection
Request
Close connection
```

### Limitations

- Creating multiple connections leads to latency and overhead to manage multuple connections.

## HTTP 1.1 keep-alive connections

- Client wants to send multiple requests to a server.
- The client and server establish a TCP connection.
- Multiple HTTP requests and responses can be exchanged over the same TCP connection using keep-alive connections.

```GO
Open connection
Request 1
Response 1
Request 2
Response 2
Request 3
Response 3
Close connection
```

### Limitations

- Requests still block each other on a connection.
- If one request is slow, others may have to wait.


## HTTP/2

- Newer version designed to solve the performance problems of HTTP/1.1
- It supports multiplexing. A single connection can carry multiple requests simultaneously. Requests are not processed in order.


## HTTPS

- HTTPS is for the secure communication between client and the server.
- In HTTP, anyone in between client and server can read the entire communication and steal sensitive information. HTTPS encrypts that communication.
- Client and server perform an additional TLS handshake that causes some latency and then start encrypted communication.


## SSL/TLS certificates

### Encryption — Keep data private

- Without a certificate, anyone between you and the server can read the traffic.
- A TLS certificate allows the browser and server to establish an encrypted connection so that intercepted data looks like random gibberish.

###  Authentication — Prove the server's identity

- To prove that you're talking to the correct server and not an impersonator.
- Imagine you want to connect to: `https://mybank.com`. How do you know you're really talking to your bank and not an attacker pretending to be the bank?
- A TLS certificate contains the server's identity and is digitally signed by a trusted Certificate Authority (CA).
