# HTTP Versions


## HTTP

- Consider a client server architecture. Client and server wants to communicate and exchange data.
- First, a TCP connection is established between the client and server using the TCP three-way handshake.
- Once the TCP connection is established, data can be exchanged over that connection.
- The HTTP request travels through the TCP connection, and the server sends an HTTP response back through the same connection.


## HTTP/1.1

- I want to cummunicate with you several times. I have a lot of requests to make.
- Okay, for every request create a new connection with me.
- Lets say, we ask our browser to render a webpage. The webpage will need resources like HTML, CSS, JS and images to render. So, browser which is a client will request server to download files.
- For every file, we need to create a new connection and then send request to server.

```go
Open connection
Request
Close connection
```

### keep-alive connections.

- To improve performance, for every file, it can reuse the same connection.
- In HTTP/1.1, requests on the same connection are processed in order.

```go
Open connection
Request HTML
Request CSS
Request JS
Request Image
Close connection
```

### Limitations

- Requests still block each other on a connection.
- If one request is slow, others may have to wait.
- Overhead of managing multiple connections.



## HTTP/2

- Newer version designed to solve the performance problems of HTTP/1.1
- It supports multiplexing. A single connection can carry multiple requests simultaneously. Requests are not processed in order.


## HTTPS

- HTTPS is for the secure communication between client and the server.
- HTTPS = HTTP + TLS encryption.
- Client and server perform an additional TLS handshake that causes some latency and then start encrypted communication.


## SSL/TLS certificates

### Encryption — Keep data private

- Without a certificate, anyone between you and the server can read the traffic.
- A TLS certificate allows the browser and server to establish an encrypted connection so that intercepted data looks like random gibberish.

###  Authentication — Prove the server's identity

- To prove that you're talking to the correct server and not an impersonator.
- Imagine you want to connect to: `https://mybank.com`. How do you know you're really talking to your bank and not an attacker pretending to be the bank?
- A TLS certificate contains the server's identity and is digitally signed by a trusted Certificate Authority (CA).
